Supporting counts from raw samples (#2686)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/introduction/measurements.rst

>>> np.all(result[0] == result[1])
True

>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: Not sure why the trailing white space didn't get caught by the black check, but no big deal.

including :func:`~.pennylane.expval`, :func:`~.pennylane.var`,
and :func:`~.pennylane.sample`.

> Counts

Reviewer 2: Great addition here! :tada: 

It would be good to add `count` to the [summary list of measurements](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/blame/156ccc29f0ac3276e9887a1964d104451947dc5e/doc/introduction/measurements.rst#L32) too.

Author: I see it more as an enhancement of a measurement function `sample()` than as a proper measurement, so I added it into the first sentence of the docstring: it will appear in the list, but not as a separate entry. See [this commit](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)

Reviewer 2: Oh, that's a great point! My bad.

------

To avoid dealing with long arrays for the larger numbers of shots, one can pass an argument counts=True

> to :func:`~pennylane.sample`. In this case the result will be a dictionnary indicating numbers of occurences for each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to :func:`~pennylane.sample`. In this case, the result will be a dictionary containing the number of occurrences for each
```

unique sample. The previous example will be modified as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2, shots=1000)

    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit():
        qml.Hadamard(wires=0)
        qml.CNOT(wires=[0, 1])
        # passing the counts flag
        return qml.sample(qml.PauliZ(0), counts=True), qml.sample(qml.PauliZ(1), counts=True)

> After executing the circuit we can directly see how often each value was measured:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After executing the circuit, we can directly see how many times each measurement outcome occurred:
```

        
>>> result = circuit()
>>> print(result)

> [tensor({-1: 526, 1: 474}, dtype=object, requires_grad=True)

Reviewer 2: Any thoughts on why the data structure is different here? I.e., the result is a list of tensors created from dictionaries instead of a single dictionary?

Author: It's not seen from the examples (because of how print() interacts with tensors), but in all the cases the function returns a tensor, that contains either a dict or other tensors of dictionaries. I went with this option in order to preserve the consistency with the return object of the counts=False case, but I wasn't sure if it's the best choice.
So, you'd suggest to avoid the tensors and return a dictionary/list of dictionaries?

Reviewer 2: Oh, that makes sense, thanks for clarifying that. :)

> So, you'd suggest to avoid the tensors and return a dictionary/list of dictionaries?

I think that would make sense, though feel free to argue against it. :slightly_smiling_face: Usually, the reason why we cast results into PennyLane NumPy arrays (tensors) is to provide differentiability for the outputs of QNodes. `qml.sample` is an exception here, it is just convenient to have `qml.sample`'s output with `counts=False` to be arraylike. When `counts=True` is set, however, perhaps a simple dictionary/list of dictionaries would make more sense. One thing to check here though might be how such a solution would work with composite measurements, e.g., would having
```py
return qml.probs(wires=[0,1]), qml.sample(wires=2, counts=True)
```
in a quantum function lead to casting issues?

Author: Indeed there are three cases:

1. Only counts. I agree, the most handy option here would be to return a dict.
2. Combination of counts with counts. I agree again, let's return a list of dicts.
3. Counts + something else. Something else may need gradient in some following computations, let's return tensor of tensors. In the way it's done now, the counts dict will be in a tensor as well, but it's easy to extract it, so why not.

The only downside is that it's cumbersome to have three different return types.

Another way would be to pass an option what to return, but it seems too much, including two variables just for a regrouping of counts (at this moment it may be simpler for a user to import and use Counter from collections).

Author: I chose the way 3, it's implemented in several latest commits

 tensor({-1: 526, 1: 474}, dtype=object, requires_grad=True)]
 

> Similarly, if the observable is not provided, the occurencies of each state are returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, if the observable is not provided, the count of each computational basis state is returned.
```

to :func:`~pennylane.sample`. In this case, the result will be a dictionary containing the number of occurrences for each
unique sample. The previous example will be modified as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2, shots=1000)

    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit():
        qml.Hadamard(wires=0)
        qml.CNOT(wires=[0, 1])
        # passing the counts flag
        return qml.sample(qml.PauliZ(0), counts=True), qml.sample(qml.PauliZ(1), counts=True)

After executing the circuit, we can directly see how many times each measurement outcome occurred:
        
>>> result = circuit()
>>> print(result)
[{-1: 526, 1: 474} {-1: 526, 1: 474}]
 
Similarly, if the observable is not provided, the count of each computational basis state is returned.

.. code-block:: python

    dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2, shots=1000)

    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit():
        qml.Hadamard(wires=0)
        qml.CNOT(wires=[0, 1])
        # passing the counts flag
        return qml.sample(counts=True)

And the result is:
           
>>> result = circuit()
>>> print(result)
{'00': 495, '11': 505}

> If another measurement function than :func:`~.pennylane.sample` is provided,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If counts are obtained along with a measurement function other than :func:`~.pennylane.sample`,
```

> the a tensor of tensors is returned to provide differentiability for the outputs of QNodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a tensor of tensors is returned to provide differentiability for the outputs of QNodes.
```
